# RESW
$web-only$
While `ress` and `ressa` consume text and generate data structures, `resw` is going to consume data structures and write out text. This is going to make solving the problem that our debug logging project has left us with trivial. However instead of just sweeping that under the rug, we are going to go over how `resw` works because the nature of JavaScript, `resw` makes some style decisions that might not work for everyone. By going over the project in detail the hope is that other's will feel enabled to either contribute a configuration option into `resw` or ever implement their own project that consumes `ressa`'s AST and generates text.

If you are not interested just seeing how we are going to finish the project from the last chapter, feel free to skip this chapter.

Similar to the structure of `ressa`, `resw` exposes a struct that will keep track of the context for us called `Writer`. There are 2 methods for constructing a `Writer`, the first is with the `::new` method the second `::builder` utilizes the _builder_ pattern to customize some options. Those options include
 - New line character (default `\n`)
 - Quote (default to use origin symbol)
   - Setting this to any value will for all of the string literals in the provided JavaScript to be re-written with the provided quotes.
 - Indent (default 4 spaces)

Either method you are going to need to provide the destination which can be anything that implements the `std::io::Write` trait. For testing purposes the crate provides an implementor of `Write` in `WriteString`, we are not going to cover that here but a more detailed explaination can be found in the [appendix](./a.appendix/string.writer.md).

Once a `Writer` is constructed, it provides a

$web-only-end$

$slides-only$
- `Writer` takes `ProgramPart`s
- Somewhat Configurable
- Writes to `impl Write`
$slides-only$